Web page tutorial

In this tutorial, we are going to create a web page – this web page!

The tutorial consists of three parts, one for each of the basic web page building blocks: HTML, CSS and JS.

HTML (Hypertext Markup Language): A (markup-) language for structuring the contents of a web page. Declares what various parts of the web page are.
CSS (Cascading Style Sheets): A set of style rules that define how the various elements of the web page should look.
JS (JavaScript): A programming language. JavaScript can be used to dynamically update the page, e.g. manipulate the DOM or otherwise instruct the Browser to do something.
Make sure that you are using a plain text editor (Notepad, Sublime Text), and not a 'rich text' word processor that embeds additional information in the file, when working through this tutorial.

HTML – Hypertext Markup Language

In this section, we will introduce HTML, elements, attributes and the DOM.

HTML is a markup language that adds meaning and structure to a text by the means of tags. HTML tags defines what parts of the document ARE.

Getting started

Create a folder for your web page.
Create an empty text file with the file extension '.html' (e.g. 'index.html').
Open the file with a web Browser, it should look like a blank page.
Copy all text from this page and paste it into your html file. Refresh the Browser – it should display a blob of text.

Fig 1. Unmarked text
Markup

The reason why your web page looks like poop is that it has got no encoded structure. We can begin adding some structure by tagging – or marking up – the headline as such.


Fig 2. Marked up heading
Enclosing a section of the text in tags like that will declare that part of the page to be a heading.

There are six levels of headings, h1 means "the most important heading", h2 means "the second most important heading" etc.

Elements

A section of the document tagged up like this is called an "element". There are a few different kinds of elements, for example "normal elements", "raw text elements" and "void elements".

When a "User agent" (e.g. a Browser) is parsing (i.e. reading through and interpreting) HTML code, it will build up a tree structure corresponding to these elements in memory. This tree is called 'the DOM' (Document Object Model), and the nodes in this tree are called "DOM Nodes".

The DOM is the Browsers in-memory representation of the web page.

Inspect your the heading with your Browser's Developer Tools. You will notice that it is not alone, but sits in a hierarchy of parent nodes.


Fig 3. Implicit elements
The reason for this is that HTML has got a notion of optional tags. Some elements are mandatory and will be created according to some scheme whether you actually add their tags to your HTML code or not. My suggestion is that you add the tags for the root element (html), the document metadata element (head) and the document content element (body) to your HTML code.


Fig 4. Explicit tags
More headings!

Mark the rest of the heading elements with suitable h-tags (h2, h3, h4 etc.).


Fig 5. More headings
Links, or anchor, elements

Hyperlinks are THE defining trait of the WWW. A section of a web page is marked as a hyperlink by the "a" tag.

A "a"-tag looks like this:


Fig 5. Anchor tag
The href-part is called "an attribute" of the element. The href attribute of the "a"-tag is a URL (or a URL fragment): http://somedomain:port/some/path#somefragment

If the address part is skipped, the URL is considered relative to the current page.
The fragment name is the "id" attribute of an element on the given page.
Go ahead and add a-tags for the links on the page. Remember that fragments target elements with a corresponding id.

Fig 5. Element id attribute
Doctype

There are several different HTML standards out in the wild. A special tag is used to declare which one a certain document should be interpreted as. It should be the first tag of the HTML page.

The latest version of HTML is called "HTML 5", and it's DOCTYPE tag looks like this:


Fig 5. Doctype tag
Lists

There are two kinds of lists in HTML. Ordered - or numbered – lists, and unordered – or bulleted – lists.

An ordered list is declared with the "ol"-tag, and its list items are declared with the "li"-tag.


Fig 9. Ordered list
An unordered list is declared with the "ul"-tag, and its list items are also declared with the "li"-tag.


Fig 10. Unordered list
Images

Images can be embedded in the text by the "img"-tag. The "src" attribute is a URL to the image. This can be absolute (i.e. contain domain and path) or relative (i.e. only contain a path relative to the current html document.


Fig 11. Image tag
Go ahead and add the images to your web page.
HTML Entities

HTML entities can be used to "escape" from special interpretation – for example when you want to actually print out less than (<), greater than (>) or – for that matter – the ampersand. &.

A HTML Entity is encoded like this: "&name_or_code;"


Fig 12. HTML Entity
Figure tags

To group an image and its caption, you can use the 'figure'-tag, like this:


Fig 11. Image tag

Fig 12. HTML Entity
Group all images with their captions.

Fig 13. Image captions
Summary

HTML pages are text files annotated, or marked up with, tags.
HTML pages are parsed by user agents, for example web browsers, into a DOM tree.
The primary purpose of HTML is to describe the structure and the semantics of the various parts of the page.
CSS – Cascading Style Sheets

HTML defines what various parts of the web page are, CSS defines how they should look.

In this section, we will introduce CSS, selectors, declaration blocks and properties.

The Browser has got a few default style rules for various elements, that's why headings look different than body text and so on (The Browser Developer Tools can list what style rules that are applied do a certain element – both default rules as well as rules applied by web page CSS).


Fig 14. User agent, or default, stylesheets.
Getting started

CSS can be written in its own file, and linked to the web page with a LINK tag – or it can be written in the HTML source itself – either as an attribute of the element tag or in its own STYLE tag.

Keeping the CSS code in its own file is best practice – so that is what we will do.

Create a new, empty, text file called "style.css" (the name is not significant, but it is a common name for the main style sheet).
Link this style sheet to the web page by adding a 'LINK' tag as a child to the to the 'HEAD' element.

Fig 15. LINK Tag
CSS rules

CSS code consists of a set of styles rules. Each rule consists of a selector and a block of style properties.


Fig 16. CSS Rule
There are a lot of selectors that can be used. We will go through some of the basic ones, but in the general case, the selector declares what elements that will be targeted by the corresponding block of style properties.

Tag name selector

Class selector

Complex selectors

hover?

Max width

General spacing

Note paragraphs

Image styling

JS – JavaScript

In this section, we will introduce JS, Script-tags, functions and the event loop.

Objects. Functions. eventListeners. global object, document object.

Getting started

- Ta till sig: Websidan är "levande". Det händer saker i den, och den kan uppdateras dynamiskt utan att ladda om den.

- Automatic ToC?

- Folding sections?

- Fetch something from the internet?

- Famous quotes?